specifications: environment lifecycle (#3140)
snapcore/snapcraft: specifications/environment-management.org

* Environment Management: Scope
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: environment-management-scope
  :END:

Specification of how snapcraft manages local and remote build
environments and their lifecycle.

This includes locally and remotely provisioned containers, VMs and build services such as Launchpad.

* Environment
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: environment
  :END:

** Identification
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: identification
   :END:

*** Local
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: local
    :END:

Unique identifier to lookup build instance from a local database.

Format: =<project-name>-<provider>-<project-directory-hex-encoded>=

Where:

- =<project-directory-hex-encoded>= is an absolute path represented in hex, e.g. =str(Path(<project-path>).absolute()).encode().hex()=.

- =<provider>= is the provider type (launchpad, multipass, lxd, host, etc.).

** Build Instance Naming
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: build-instance-naming
   :END:

> Build instance will be named =snapcraft-<project_name>=. If name is unavailable, attempt to reuse it. Otherwise use =snapcraft-<project_id>=.

Author: good point s/will/shall

> Build instance will be named =snapcraft-<project_name>=. If name is unavailable, attempt to reuse it. Otherwise use =snapcraft-<project_id>=.

Author: wow that's such a glaring omission, fixed

** Build Instance Lifecycle
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: build-instance-lifecycle
   :END:

*** Creation
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: creation
    :END:

Creating an environment when running snapcraft inside a project:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
    def is_stale(env):
      elapsed = time.now() - env.last_used
      return elapsed.days > 7

    def is_environment_reusable(env):
      return not env.project_path.exists() or env.is_stale():

    def get_environment(project_name, project_id):
      name = f"snapcraft-{project_name}"
      env = lookup_environment(name)

      if env and env.project_id == project_id:
        return env

      if not env or is_environment_reusable(env):
        return create_fresh_environment(name)

      name = f"snapcraft-{project_id}"
      env = lookup_environment(name)
      if is_environment_reusable(env) or ask_user_to_reuse(name):
        return create_fresh_environment(name)

      # User refused to re-use name, abort.
      abort()

    env = get_environment(project_path)
#+END_EXAMPLE

*** Removal
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: removal
    :END:

> Two options:

Reviewer: Two options? Can you disambiguate this? I understand after reading everything, maybe this is two sections

Removal from withing project

Removal of 1...N projects

- Use =snapcraft clean= from within project directory.

- Use new command =purge= (or =purge-containers=, or =purge-build-environments=?) from anywhere.

=snapcraft purge [--all|--stale] [--unknown] [--force] [--provider <provider>] [--dry-run] [project-names...]=

- =--force= will purge all build environments without prompting users for confirmation.

- =--all= will purge all registered build environments and metadata.

- =--stale= will purge all registered build environments and metadata unused for more than 7 days.

- =--unknown= will include build-environments that are unregistered, but are formatted like snapcraft containers (i.e. starting with =snapcraft-<name>[-<hash>]=, excluding =snapcraft-dev=).

- =--provider <provider>= to limit actions to a specified provider.

- =--dry-run= will print a list of environments that would be purged.

- =project-names= is an optional set of project names to specifically clean. Can be used to clean unknown remote build environments.

*** Force Refresh
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: force-refresh
    :END:

> Build environment will automatically be purged and re-created if it is registered (known to snapcraft) and either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build environment will automatically be purged and re-created if it is registered (known to snapcraft) and either:
```

> 1. Created by incompatible version of snapcraft (typically running version of snapcraft is older than version that created it).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Created by an incompatible version of Snapcraft (typically running version of Snapcraft is older than version that created it).
```

> 2. Environment OS does not match project base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Build Environment OS does not match that of the project base.
```

Take it or leave it

* Environment Management: Scope

>   :PROPERTIES:

Reviewer: mind removing these property drawers?

Author: done

**** Removal via =snapcraft purge=
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: removal-via-snapcraft-purge
    :END:

Introduce new =snapcraft purge= command:

=snapcraft purge [--all|--stale] [--unknown] [--force] [--provider <provider>] [--dry-run] [project_names...]=

- =--force= shall purge all build environments without prompting users for confirmation.

- =--all= shall purge all registered build environments and metadata.

- =--stale= shall purge all registered build environments and metadata unused for more than 7 days.

- =--unknown= shall include build-environments that are unregistered, but are formatted like snapcraft containers (i.e. starting with =snapcraft-<name>[-<hash>]=, excluding =snapcraft-dev=).

- =--provider <provider>= to limit actions to a specified provider.

- =--dry-run= shall print a list of environments that would be purged.

- =project_names= is an optional set of project names to specifically clean. Can be used to clean unknown remote build environments.

> *** Force Refresh

Reviewer: This seems rather disconnected

Author: Reworked.

For additional safety, =--dry-run= argument shall be supported to log all
=build-instance(s)= that would be cleaned if =--dry-run= were not present.

* Environment Manager Datastore

Snapcraft shall utilize a TinyDB-based datastore with YAML storage. TinyDB
provides database functionality, including support for queries, which shall
support operations to maintain build environments throughout their lifecycle.

This =environment-manager-datastore= shall be per-user such that Snapcraft does
not require root. The =environment-manager-datastore= shall reside in
=<user-data>/snapcraft/environment-manager.yaml=, where =<user-data>= is the
first defined value of:
  1. $SNAP_USER_DATA
  2. $XDG_DATA_HOME
  3. $HOME/.local/share

** Table Schema

*** Control

The =environment-manager-datastore= shall have a =Control= table with one, and
only one, =control= record:

|--------------------------------+---------+--------------------------------------------------+---------|
| field                          | type    | description                                      | example |
|--------------------------------+---------+--------------------------------------------------+---------|

> | created_with_snapcraft_version | string  | Version of Snapcraft that created this document.  | "4.0.1" |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| created_with_snapcraft_version | string  | Version of Snapcraft that created this document. | "4.0.1" |
```

* Environment Management: Scope

Specification of how Snapcraft manages local and remote build
environments and their lifecycle.

This includes locally and remotely provisioned containers, VMs and build
services such as Launchpad.

* Terminology

** Snapcraft Build Environment Counter (build-count)

Counter that increments every time Snapcraft creates a new build environment.
Initialized to zero =0=.  Tracked in the environment-manager datastore.

** Project Instance Identification (project-id)

Unique identifier for project, derived from counter =build-count=. The counter
will be atomically incremented when claiming an identifier.

** Build Environment Instance Naming (project-instance-name)

The build environment's user-facing name.

> Format: =snapcraft-<project-id>-<project-name>-<project-id>=

Reviewer: double project-id, cannot pick? :-)

Author: will fix

Author: fixed.

** "Stale" Build Environment

> A build environment that is older than 7 days.

Reviewer: 7 days should be configurable and we should define where here

Author: I'm thinking we switched from daily to release images, maybe we shouldn't expire it unless the fingerprint changes?

Author: I'm going to abandon the stale environment concept for now.  We'll just improve our checks to make sure the environment is sane, as necessary.

> * Build Instance Lifecycle

Reviewer: there's a mix of presentation and internal details here that might be worth separating

** Creation

When running =snapcraft= inside a project that requires a build environment,

> Snapcraft shall lookup build environments for user-selected provider and see if

Reviewer: is user-selected a system attribute? If not, it feels like some words are missing in this sentence

Author: will fix

Author: fixed.

> build-environment already exists and is available for re-use.

Reviewer: build-environment is not defined, maybe also enclose it between = if this is a system thing

Author: will fix

Author: fixed.

If no existing build environment is available, =snapcraft= shall create a new

> one, naming it =snapcraft-<project_name>-<counter>=.

Author: ```suggestion
one, naming it =snapcraft-<project_name>-<counter>=.
one, naming it =snapcraft-<counter>-<project_name>=.
```

** Re-using Build Environments

When a build environment is going to be re-used, Snapcraft shall first verify
it:

> 1. was created by a compatible version of Snapcraft.

Reviewer: Graham always removes my periods when I do listings

Author: He is the documentation expert.  Noted.

Author: fixed.

2. has an operating system version compatible with `base` (or `build-base`).

3. it is not stale (older than 7 days).

If any of these checks fail, Snapcraft shall automatically clean the environment
and create a new instance to use.

** Removal

The user can remove a build environment instance using two methods:

- Use =snapcraft clean= from within project directory, using existing behavior.

> - Use new command =purge= (or =purge-containers=, or

Reviewer: snapcraft clean --all? Query from the cli if not on a project and ask if that is what you wanted?

Author: It's a bit convoluted with the overloaded usage, but we can certainly do something like that.

Might help to add a little more context, i.e.:
- `--all-providers` to clean this project on all providers.
- `--all-projects` to clean all projects [on current provider, or all providers if specified].

Author: `clean` to purge all providers.  Providers should stick when environment created, until clean, or provider explicitly (re)set.

  =purge-build-environments=?) from anywhere.

**** Removal via =snapcraft clean=

> Cleans build instance matching current project identifier.  Command stays the
> same as current behavior, except with a new check to verify the build instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cleans the build instance matching current project identifier.  Command retains its
current behavior, except with a new check to verify the =project-instance-name=
```

I may have got that right, maybe use the terminology as much as possible since it is defined.

Author: Committed this, but needs a little further consideration

identifier prior to removal (to prevent cleaning an unrelated instance).

**** Removal via =snapcraft purge=

Introduce new =snapcraft purge= command:

=snapcraft purge [--all|--stale] [--unknown] [--force] [--provider <provider>]
[--dry-run] [project_names...]=

- =--force= shall purge all build environments without prompting users for
  confirmation.

- =--all= shall purge all registered build environments and metadata.

- =--stale= shall purge all registered build environments and metadata unused
  for more than 7 days.

- =--unknown= shall include build-environments that are unregistered, but are
  formatted like Snapcraft containers (i.e. starting with

>   =snapcraft-<name>[-<hash>]=, excluding =snapcraft-dev=).

Author: ```suggestion
  =snapcraft-<#>-<name>=).
```

Counter that increments every time Snapcraft creates a new build environment.
Initialized to zero =0=.  Tracked in the environment-manager datastore.

** Snapcraft Project Path (project-path)

Absolute path to a Snapcraft project directory (containing Snapcraft.yaml,
etc.).

** Snapcraft Project Name (project-name)

Name of snap (specified in =snapcraft.yaml='s =name= field).

** Snapcraft Project (project-instance)

> A Snapcraft project, found in =project-path=.

Reviewer: Maybe
```suggestion
An instance of a Snapcraft project, found in =project-path=.
```
?

No more than one =project-instance= can exist in =project-path=.

There may be multiple =project-instance(s)= for a given =project-name=

> (typically a user working with multiple project copies/checkouts

Reviewer: interesting point about checkouts, is the intention to treat a checkout of a branch on a given path as a different project? I suspect not. Maybe just remove "checkouts" if that is the case.
